My mother's still alive. My father died in 1962. I have one sister who's nine years younger than me. My mother was, has been, always is, and is still to this day, demanding excellence and growth. There was a kind of ambition in her that was always present. If I called her up and told her that something appeared in the L.A. Times about me and it was on the second page, she'd say, "Why wasn't it on the first page?" My father died before I was anything in terms of my career as an architect. He was somehow disappointed that I wasn't a businessman. He was born in New York, and his father died when he was a child. He grew up in Hell's Kitchen. He was a dead-end kid. He was a boxer. He didn't have a chance to make it. He didn't have any high school. He was a salesman in Canada — slot machines, and pinball machines, those popcorn things, those fortune teller things, bowling alley things, Wurlitzer jukeboxes. He had a route in Northern Canada where he had all that stuff.

My mother had the expectation. I think my father liked me, but I was always a dreamer. I played hockey in Canada. He wasn't too interested in my activities. My mother took me to the museums and concerts and pushed that — the art — all the time. I think he had the talent; she had the ambition. He could never overcome this business thing, his own ambition to be a businessman. Financially, I'm more successful than he ever was — not that this is great financial success — but it wasn't hard to beat him. I think he just had that focus, that he had to make it financially.

My father was a lot of fun. He was successful in business until I was about 14, 15 years old, and then it started to go sour for him. Then, in the late '40s, he moved out here to Los Angeles because he was sick. He was already a failure by then. Financially he was washed up. He had to take a job in a liquor store as a salesman. He had a hard time. I was 17, just beginning to start college. It was very painful.

I didn't know what I wanted to be. I wanted to be something. The only role model I had was a cousin who's a chemical engineer, so coming out of high school I thought I wanted to be a chemical engineer. One day, a chemical engineer came to the school to give a presentation to the students, and I told him that's what I wanted to be. Something about it didn't ring true to him. He took me out to his lab and showed me what they did. At the end of the day, he said, "I'm real excited that you want to do this, but you don't want to do this." And he showed me why.

I had a very close friend, and he and I became atheists in grade 11. Up to then, because of my grandparents and my training in the Hebrew school, I'd been thinking about going to the Rabbinical school at some point. My friend Ross and I got together and started arguing about religion. We were ostracized in our class by the other kids. We were the atheists in the class, and the girls wouldn't go out with us. We couldn't get a date, nothing. Nobody would talk to us because we were the weirdos in the class. And so there was a certain notoriety as the outsider that fits my later life I guess.

Musicians that I had heard, and Franklin Roosevelt. When he died, I remember that was painful. My grandparents were influential. I spent a lot of time with my mother's parents. My grandfather had a hardware store in Toronto. It was a tiny little place, but he was well known, and I used to work there. We were very close, and I would go there and play with the nails and the bolts and help him fix clocks. I used to stay over at their house. My grandmother had a big effect on me. She had run a foundry in Poland when she was a young girl, and she was very hands-on. She would take me to the woodshops where she'd pick up scraps for the wood stove she cooked on. She would bring home all the scraps, and we would play on the floor. She would make cities with me.

I finally hit rock bottom when I arrived here in Los Angeles. Everything was going bad for my mother, and I was in college, working as a truck driver, going to night school. It was really a terrible time. I remember I was searching for what to do. I thought of radio announcing, and then I didn't think that was right. I had taken classes in drawing and perspective and I flunked. I was good in math. I was all over the place. I had taken ceramics classes at USC. I couldn't afford to go to school full-time. And I remembered sitting on the floor and making these cities with my grandmother. When you think of it, it's an adult giving a kid a license saying, "When you grow up, you can play." You had these fantasies, and you could play and play about serious stuff like cities. My grandmother didn't know anything about it. It was my fantasy. She would see me making cities with the blocks and she would sit on the floor with me and do it.

I realized that that was really an important thing, so I took a night class in architecture at USC. Now, there were several things that came together at once: the memory of grandma and sitting on the floor and an experience I had connected to the ceramics class I took with a teacher, Glen Lukens. Lukens was having a house designed by architect Raphael Soriano, who used to walk around in a black suit with a black beret and a black tie. Lukens took me to the house, introduced me to Soriano, and I said, "Wow, look at this guy, building this thing." It clicked. So Lukens said, "Look, I want you to take this night course in architecture." So there was a move there. I just met the right people at the right time.

At the end of the year at the night class in architecture, I had my first real success in school. The teacher recommended that I skip into second year. In other words, this was a test course — people took it, and then they would start the architecture program if they could get accepted based on having a portfolio from this class, and they would start in first year. I didn't know this, but he picked three or four of us out of a class of 40 or 50, to be put into second year immediately.

Art in school wasn't a big deal to me, although I used to draw in my books. I was never really the artist in the class in high school. In the Hebrew school, I remember drawing pictures of the heroes from Israel. I remember the rabbi folding them up and then calling my parents and telling them I was really talented. But I don't think it ever clicked with me.

My father was a big liberal. He was always political — knocking the system — and our house was always filled with all kinds of people of different races and different backgrounds. He had no judgments about that. As a salesman, he would run into people who were in the carnival business — we would always get free tickets to the carnival when it came to town. There was a black boxer, who was blind, who used to babysit for me. It was always like that. My mother was a little bit fancy, so she didn't embrace all of this, but it was part of his shtick, and she accepted it. So the house was this liberal base, and then my grandparents' relatives were all garment guys, and they belonged to unions, so there was always that. And my father was always championing some cause. He loved FDR. It was a very liberal kind of atmosphere.

My third-year architecture professor was and is a humanist. His name is Cal Straub. He talked about the good life, and the need for sociology and anthropology and art history, and all of those things came clearly into focus for me. I'd had some art history before, and I was always involved with artists. At USC, we were in the same building. When I could, I always tried to bring the artist into the room with the architects. This chasm still exists. Cal Straub was a socially aware guy, and my politics locked in, and I got very excited. I saw what architecture could get into — the issues of housing and city planning and social services. That really turned me on.

For my thesis in architectural school, I got involved with a Mexican friend in my class whose family was related to the governor of Baja California. With him, for my thesis, I was able to do a housing and master plan for Baja, and we were paid by the government. We made presentations and we brought in the geography department and the political science department. It was really exciting. From that energy, I wanted to go into city planning and government. I was drafted, I went into the Army, and from the Army I went to Harvard to city planning school.

When I did some of my early buildings, some of the painters — Ed Moses, Kenny Price, Craig Kauffman, a bunch of those guys — used to come around. I used to meet them at the construction site, and they'd introduce themselves. I used to go to art galleries on Monday nights and look at the work and really get into it. It was a little group. It was Bob Therrien, John Altoon, Kenny Price, and Moses. The L.A. scene at that time. These were all names and people I knew, and I loved their work in all cases. So that was a real hit for me.

When I started my practice in '62, the first buildings intrigued those artists for some reason that I didn't understand. And I became involved socially with them. They became my support group, because the architects didn't like what I was doing. The architectural community was very judgmental about my early work. Being involved with the artists really helped me. It connected me to a way of working that felt good to me, that related to materials. It was more direct.

When I did my house in '78 and lost all the clients I had. Before that, the clients I had were developer types. Businessmen. I was a service architect — I believed that's what you did — and I was doing work for people that I was not in control of. I'd done some good projects, like the Danziger Studio in Hollywood, and stuff at the Hollywood Bowl. I'd always been trying to do the best work; I'd always had a standard. But I didn't have the horsepower with the clients to achieve it, so there were always compromises.

I built a house around a house using chain-link fence, corrugated metal, asphalt, and other common building materials. It was the first completely free piece I did. I did it exactly the way I wanted. My client was me and my wife, and my wife egged me on. I talked about the asphalt floor, and I was going to chicken out, and she said, "Come on, I want to see that." I was terrified when that guy sitting in my house said what he did. I thought, "Oh my God, here's a company that 50 percent of my office is involved in with their work." I remember saying, "You're right, you're right" — and so they stopped giving me work. It was over.

We reacted by cutting down from a 35-man office to a three- or four-man office. We started over again. And I felt liberated. For the first time, I understood that I was wasting my time on those other kinds of projects and that, from now on, I was only going to do what I really liked to do.

I've never done any marketing for clients. The clients always came for some reason. There was a new clarity, in that from that day on I told everybody what I intended. I became clearer about myself. I became a better architect. I became more useful to the clients who wanted me than I had been when I was trying to accommodate them. In fact, what I realized was that I was doing them a disservice, because I wasn't giving them my best. They were paying for something that they weren't getting.

Once I got my anchor, a hold on what I could do as my own work, my mud pies as I call them — I found I had much more power with people skills and persuasion. I can get up before an audience and give a presentation and do very well where I couldn't before. Before, I was kind of operating from weakness. I was dishonest, because I was making compromises and hating the client for putting me in that position. And so you just end up despising the people you're working for. It's not their fault, they didn't know they put you in a compromising position.

A big one was meeting Milton Wexler, a close friend who's a psychologist. Ed Moses took me to him, because Wexler was involved with the artists at the time. I didn't become Wexler's patient on the couch, but he became a confidant. A very close friend. Milton helped me clarify what I was. He was the one who made me see that I was really thinking like an artist and not like a businessman. Earlier, I was trying to live in these two worlds for some reason. He helped me consolidate, and go with my strengths, and jump off the cliff as it were.

Making better mud pies. The struggle now is to take some of these ideas into a bigger arena. I've never done a real museum. We're just getting a small one to do at the University of Minnesota. In doing the Temporary Contemporary at MOCA and the museum in Santa Monica, I worked with existing buildings. I just cleaned them up.

I guess that I'm responding to the time I live in. I don't like thinking about going backward to the past. I think I'm willing to take the risk that you could make a building in this time and respond to the time. The clues are all out there for me very clearly. And I'm willing to take those chances and make building forms, I respond to that, to what I see around me, what the world is about. So it's dealing in a way with the present, and commenting on it in some way or another, versus trying to recreate Rome in Los Angeles.

For me, it's having a sense of the freedom to do, to explore one's own ideas and philosophies, which in my case are visual. And to find support for that. The rewards are the freedom and ability. I've always been threatened by poverty. I've always been at the edge and we still are occasionally. But my wife runs the business end, and I have good people now. I don't get involved with it anymore. So I worry a lot less.

I'm a perfectionist. Much more than people think. One of the perceptions of me is that I'm not interested in detail, because the work sort of looks casual, but I must admit it's a contrived casual. To do it is very difficult. It takes a lot of expertise in the detail area, and I'm fastidious about it. The hand on the tiller is pretty firm all the way to the end.

One mentor I didn't talk about was Philip Johnson, who is in his 80s, and still working and still excited. He and I sit on the phone and yak about architecture. He's a great role model, since he is interested in architecture so much that he's always looking for who's doing what and where, and has consistently searched out people. He came to see me when I did the Ron Davis house and argued with me about the validity of that as architecture. We've had a relationship ever since.
